hello everyone my name is James and
welcome to gay geek theory today I would
like to talk about something that I'm
calling the Stonewall effect or maybe
the Stonewall film effect as someone who
has gone to film school worked in the
film industry and then also gotten a
business degree and worked in marketing
I feel like I have a pretty good view of
the film industry from you know from a
distance a very far distance like
surface of the Moon on October 31st
distance Hollywood has always had a
love-hate relationship with the LGBT
community
though we may dominate certain sections
of the behind-the-scenes world gay men
drag queens and lesbians were only
peppered throughout early cinema not
really in major roles but we were
visible like Marlena Dietrich and
Morocco this gender-bending bisexual
scene turned a lot of heads when the
film came out in 1930 the characters
were usually played for laughs but we
were still represented we were there on
the big screen and you could tell it was
encoded or subtle those characters were
gay gay gay gay gay gay and really movie
goers didn't seem to mind
well most movie goers anyway you see
movies were getting crazy or at least
that's what the religious Rite thought
showing violent sex and questionable
moral behavior we're an easy way to get
people talking about a movie and then
getting their butts in theater seats but
a lot of Catholic and Protestant groups
just weren't having it and through a
series of threats that have had entire
books written about them they forced the
film industry as a whole to start self
censoring lest they become chained to
the moral hem of those opinionated
Christians and so the Hays Code was
introduced named after William Hayes
doesn't he look like a happy fella to
begin censoring movies violence could no
longer be shown without the perpetrator
getting has come up and somehow death
jail and repenting to God were all
accepted outcomes nudity was a big no-no
there was no reasoning with them on that
front and sexuality could only be shown
between married or committed couples
again unless you show those horndogs
being punished for their nasty sex in
some way basically all the fun was taken
out of the movies this was when mobster
movie started to reel
take off because you could show all the
violence you wanted but since the main
characters probably died in the end it
was okay
oh and homosexuality was outright banned
in the beginning shocker
I know but clever writers and directors
figured out ways to get gay characters
in the movies again just in a more coded
veiled way even movies as big as Ben Hur
the 1959 version written by gay writer
gore Vidal included some homoerotic
subtext though it was inserted without
the knowledge of lead actor Charlton
Heston who would say it didn't exist
until the day he died and for the most
part things basically stayed that way
until the Hays Code started falling
apart in the 1960s movies like The
Children's Hour the producers and
Midnight Cowboy started appearing
Midnight Cowboy even won Best Picture
despite its ex rating from the MPAA
which it got for a gay [ __ ] scene
then in 1970 came the boys in the band
which was the first big Hollywood movie
that featured an all-gay cast of all gay
characters it was pretty big deal at the
time it would be a pretty big deal today
we showed up here and there throughout
the 1970's and early 80's but nothing of
note the gave hannah kicked in about
halfway through the 80s when AIDS was
known as the gay cancer and gays became
Hollywood's best new villains we were
psychotic evil bloodthirsty a whole
group of Jeffrey Dahmer's each and every
one of us or we were dying of AIDS so we
were either dying or killing what had
great decade the 80s were but then Bill
Clinton was elected president after 12
long years of Republican rule in the
White House and Hollywood started to
ease up on us gays a little bit other
than Silence of the Lambs which the gays
were not happy about
I might make a whole other video on that
suffice to say we bitched about nothing
the 1990s gave us some pretty solid game
movies Priscilla Queen of the desert to
Wong foo thank you for everything Julie
Newmar The Birdcage Philadelphia my own
Private Idaho 1997 alone gave us wild
Kiss Me Guido in and out and gay
inclusive films like as good as it gets
Boogie Nights in The Full Monty in 1999
we got the talented mr. Ripley boys
don't cry and cruel intentions I know
not exactly happy portrayals of gay
characters but representation
nonetheless things were looking up and
with the dawn of the new millennium
queer as folk became one of the most
talked-about and eventually one of the
most profitable TV shows in television
history
by the end of its run queer as folk
actually had to add an extra 15 minutes
on to its hour because so many people
wanted to buy commercials that doesn't
even happen now
then came the Bush administration and
gay representation at least from
mainstream Hollywood studios seem to dry
up sure we got the hours which didn't
turn a profit and some independent fare
like Mambo Italiano and monster again
not exactly a positive portrayal and I
guess you could argue that Chicago is
pretty gay and that Frodo and Sam might
have had something going on the down-low
but you'd be reaching for the first few
years the closest thing to a gay movie
that any major Hollywood studio put out
was x-men 2 gay director Bryan Singer
slathered the mutant as gay metaphor all
over that movie but just like the Lord
of the Rings in Chicago its subtext and
we're looking for plain simple text here
then Along Came 2005 I like to think of
2005 as a test case for queer cinema
first up rent a rock opera about
straights gays and bisexuals living and
singing together an AIDS infested early
90s New York City cost forty million
dollars to produce and made 31 million
dollars at the worldwide box office
here's some box office info you may not
actually know theaters take about half
of the money that a movie makes so a
movie needs to make twice as much as its
budget in order for the studio to break
even and that's not even counting the
cost of advertising the movie so when
you look at it that way rent was an even
bigger bomb next we have Capote 7
million dollar production budget with a
worldwide box office of just under 50
million okay now we're talking nothing
to write home about but at least it
turned a profit Hollywood is a business
after all and they love making money
finally we have Brokeback Mountain a
movie people are still angry about not
winning Best Picture at the Oscars this
movie is sometimes credited as being the
moment a lot of Americans realize that
gay people can actually love each other
and it's not just about sex made for 14
million dollars it brought in a hundred
and seventy eight million dollars at the
worldwide box office
those are the kinds of numbers that
Hollywood likes to see but here's the
thing
looking at 2005 from a business
standpoint Brokeback Mountain is the
outlier Capote did well yes but not
anywhere beyond what other movies of its
ilk were doing at the time or now
meaning Oscar bait movies and of course
rent was a total bomb so Brokeback
Mountain was the was breaking the rule
that gay movies don't make money so what
would happen
well Hollywood would test the gay
community in 2006 we got running with
scissors based on the best-selling book
of the same name producers were hoping
for a big return sadly it was a terribly
made movie and it bombed producers and
executives didn't see a bad movie that
lost money though they saw a gay movie
that lost money in 2009 milk won two
Oscars but failed to turn a profit so
now that we've got some contacts let me
get to the reason why I call this the
Stonewall effect with the Stonewall film
effect the next time Hollywood as a
studio system put real faith behind a
gay movie was 20 15 10 years after
Brokeback Mountain directed by Roland
Emmerich the movie did what every
historical movie has done and
whitewashed the story
it wasn't drag queens gay and
transgender people of color who started
the fight for gay rights it was a pretty
blond boy from Kansas or Nebraska one of
the flat states because of this there
was a fierce campaign against the movie
online boycotts were planned and what
Hollywood hoped would turn into the
first gay blockbuster turned into a
massive tax write-off making only a
hundred and eighty seven thousand
dollars worldwide yeah missin a few
zeroes there guys so what is the
Stonewall film effect it's when a gay
movie fails because of a reason other
than being about gay people Hollywood
executives however don't see that they
see a gay movie that lost money they see
a gay movie being protested gays
boycotted Silence of the Lambs in 1991
but it made 272 million dollars so it
wasn't the boycott that made Stonewall
fail it was because it was about gay
people audiences obviously don't want
gay movies maybe a supporting character
and a cheap rom-com or chick flick here
and there but no lead roles you see
every gay movie that fails fails because
it's a gay movie but every gay movie
that succeeds succeeds for a different
reason
case in point The Birdcage starred Robin
Williams at his prime Philadelphia
starred Tom Hanks won him an Oscar
Brokeback Mountain had two of the
hottest actors in Hollywood and happened
right after George W Bush started his
campaign against gay marriage so there
is a little sympathy now I'm not saying
these are the reasons that these movies
succeeded but this is what Hollywood
executives tell themselves so where does
that leave us well as a gay man who
would actually like to see some major
gay characters in movies I'm at an
impasse from a business standpoint my
view is that we meaning the LGBT
community should go out and see every
movie that features LGBT characters
whether they're gay men lesbians
bisexuals or transgender people see them
all every one of them in theaters and
buy the blu-ray no matter how terrible
they are but James that means Hollywood
will just keep making bad gay movies ah
that's the counter-argument and you know
if we support movies like Stonewall
which white wash and sis washed history
Hollywood we'll just keep making movies
like that fair argument and history kind
of backs you up to a point
for decades african-americans were
portrayed in two ways in movies
dangerous criminals or slaves that was
it it's like the scary butch Dyke gay
best friend or depressed transgender
person stereotypes the LGBT community
hates but eventually you got the
blaxploitation movement in the 1970s
which despite its name sound and kind
of- actually went a long way in
introducing audiences to strong black
characters shaft and Foxy Brown for
instance were they great movies not
always sure we look back and cringe at
some of them now but they laid the
groundwork for movies to star Eddie
Murphy in Denzel Washington in the 1990s
and Mabel
money doing it and then that laid the
groundwork for more overtly black movies
like the Medea series in the 2000s in
the 2010s which then laid the groundwork
for Black Panther a 200 million dollar
superhero movie with an almost all black
cast taking place in a technologically
superior African nation no step-in
Fetchit s-- here our main character a
superhero is a king so where's our gay
superhero they do exist
Marvel's wicked and hulling DC's
Midnighter and Apollo so where are they
well they remain relegated to the pages
of limited yet popular comic book runs
because we meaning the LGBTQ community
haven't shown the Hollywood executives
that were willing to spend our money on
gay movies we need to deal with the bad
gay movies like running with scissors
rent and yes maybe even Stonewall line
up around the block to see them support
them and put our hard-earned dollars
into the bloated wallets of Hollywood
executives because when they see bad gay
movies succeeding they'll start buying
up those good gay movies whose
screenplays get ignored in 2016
moonlight a gay and black movie was made
for 1.5 million dollars people heard it
was good we heard it was good and we
went it made 65 million dollars
worldwide for a movie about a gay black
man that's pretty good I'd say it's
exceptional actually if you look at the
box-office performance of other movies
like that so we've got one Oscar winning
box-office hit on our hands first time
since Brokeback Mountain 10 years ago
over 10 years ago so what are we gonna
do now this time are we going to ignore
the next LGBT inclusive movie because it
wasn't made exactly like we wanted it to
be are we going to swallow our hear in
queer pride and support LGBT cinema even
when it's not great because remember it
took a lot of slave movies and terrible
comedies to get to black panther so
let's show hollywood we mean business
the next time an LGBT inclusive movie
hits a theater near you go take friends
see it twice even if you hate it because
if it makes money we might just get a
gay superhero movie in the next
years or a Stonewall movie that actually
tells the truth if gays have shown
anything it's that we're good at forcing
otherwise slow processes to speed up
change in Hollywood can make change in
Washington look damn near supersonic
unless there's money involved you want
gay movies you want lesbian heroes
bisexual leading man
a transgender superhero let's put our
money where our mouths are and support
gay cinema even the bad ones you've got
to start somewhere and after a century
of cinema we're still at the starting
gate so what do you guys think I'd love
to hear your opinions on this so leave
them in the comments below and I will
see you in the next video thanks for
watching bye